You learned that service workers are background processes which can listen to events, now which events
can we listen to?
Now fetch is one of the most important events,
it is triggered whenever the browser or page-related Javascript,
so Javascript running because it was loaded by the index.html or by any HTML page initiates a
fetch which is a HTTP request.
Now that could be because you have an image tag in your HTML code and you obviously point to some
image resource there and when the browser tries to get that image to display it, it actually sends such
a fetch request. You can react to that fetch request in the service worker and you can basically think
of the service worker serving as a network proxy. Every HTTP request sent via fetch
and that is every request sent by the browser due to HTML loading some assets goes through the service worker.
So whenever you load a CSS, JavaScript file because you import it in your HTML file, that triggers
fetch. Whenever you use the fetch API, you will learn more about it in the next course module,
whenever you use that API in your own Javascript code, you also trigger such a fetch request. Important,
you don't trigger a fetch request
if you use a normal traditional Ajax request in Javascript, so the XML HTTP request or any package
like axios which builds up on that, that won't trigger the fetch event.
So with that, the cool thing is since most requests go through the service worker as soon as you start listening
to the fetch event at least, you have ways of manipulating these requests,
you can block them,
you can return cached assets, you can control them basically, really powerful.
Another cool event are push notifications,
these are sent from another server,
basically every browser window like Google for Chrome and Mozilla for Firefox has its own push web push
server.
You can send push notifications to the service from your own server
and then these vendor service of the browser vendors will send this push notification to your client
application and in the service worker, you can listen for such a push event, so for such an incoming push
request.
Why do you do this in the service worker and not in the normal Javascript page? Because remember what
I said,
service workers live in the background
and they even live once all your pagers were closed,
so push notifications obviously are all about getting you as a user back into the application after
you closed it.
If you are still in the application,
yes you maybe still want to push notify the user but it's far more valuable if your phone is in your
pocket,
make your phone ring, give you a push notification. With service workers, you can get this behavior you
know from native applications into your browser web applications and service workers are the key
because they can react to that push notification.
Now once you've got that push notification, you often want to show an alert, a notification to the user
in your application or on the phone.
Now if the user interacts with that, for example he taps on that notification, you can also listen to
that interaction in the service worker to do something with it,
show an example page, load something from the cache, whatever you want to do,
so you can react to the user interaction with notifications in the service worker.
Why do you do that
in the service worker and not in the normal Javascript code? Because again, that might not be loaded,
there might not be a tab open with your web application,
the service worker always runs though, so it's the best place to handle notification interaction.
Another very useful event is background synchronisation.
Imagine a case where you don't have that good of an internet connection and you send a post.
Now if the internet connection is bad, that will fail.
Now some browsers, mainly Chrome right now but support is getting better as for all these features you learn
in the course,
some browsers allow you to use background synchronisation, which means you store a certain action
if it can't be executed right now and you execute it once Internet connection was re-established.
Now to know when this is the case, the browser which supports background synchronization will issue
a certain event or emit a certain event to which you can listen in the service worker.
Why in the service worker? For the same reason as before,
maybe you already closed the application.
Well the good thing is the service worker is still alive and therefore if internet connection is established
again, you can react to it in the service worker and execute that action you stored and you couldn't
execute earlier, so it allows you basically to do something once the internet connection is re-established,
very useful too.
And then there are also events which are related to the service worker lifecycle,
so the installation and the activation,
I'll come back to the different lifecycle phases and how you activate and use a service worker
in the next lectures. You can hook into these lifecycle phases and execute some code,
for example whilst the service worker is getting installed. These are the main, the most important events
you can listen to in a service worker.
You will see them all, in this course
we're going to cover everything about that,
you will see how to really take advantage of service workers
but with that I'd say let's dive into registering a service worker and understand how we actually set
one up and how we tell the browser that this is not a normal Javascript code
we execute all the time but that we actually want to register a background process.